Sips (#1598)
symbol/symbol: SIPs/sip-1.md

> ---

Reviewer: It should follow a structure from the template.

> Sip: 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SIP: 1
```
Acronyms are always uppercase!

## Proposed Changes

- Establish a standardized SIP process and markdown template.
- Define clear roles and responsibilities for authors and maintainers.
- Use GitHub as the central hub for SIP tracking and discussions.

## Rationale

The Symbol community regularly generates valuable ideas, but many contributors are unsure how to formally submit or advocate for changes. Discussions often happen in informal channels like Discord or Twitter and are quickly lost. This proposal provides a clear, transparent, and collaborative pathway for meaningful contributions to Symbol's evolution.

## Implementation

### SIP Workflow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Proposer
participant Discord/Twitter
participant Maintainer
participant GitHub

Proposer->>Discord/Twitter: 1. Discuss idea with the community
Proposer->>Maintainer: 2. Request SIP number
Maintainer->>GitHub: 3. Create SIP issue
Proposer->>GitHub: 4. Submit SIP PR
Maintainer->>GitHub: 5. Review PR and provide feedback
Maintainer->>GitHub: 6. Update SIP status
```

1. Proposer comes up with an idea and discusses it in a public channel (Discord, Twitter, etc).

> 2. When the proposer considers the idea to be mature enough, they requests a SIP number from a relevant maintainer.

Reviewer: I do have a few suggestions:

In step 2 it’s not very clear what qualifies an idea as “mature enough” for requesting an SIP number. I’d suggest reversing the flow a bit: allow the proposer to open a PR first, following the SIP template. This ensures the idea is presented in a structured and readable format from the beginning, and the PR itself becomes the starting point for community discussion and feedback.

Also instead of requiring a maintainer to be found before submission, I’d propose letting the author submit a complete SIP PR with a provisional or to-be-assigned number. A maintainer can then join the process during the review phase to assign a number and help guide the status updates.

This approach could make it easier for new contributors to participate and reduce friction early in the process. Let me know what you think!

Author: >  “mature enough”

imo the “mature enough” is more on the community member like the idea or concpet, so we can move forward.

> This ensures the idea is presented in a structured and readable format from the beginning, and the PR itself becomes the starting point for community discussion and feedback.

I am planning to use `issue` as the starting point for community discussion, PR should only focus on the maintainer and author, imo.

Let me create one diagram for that. So we can compare the differences.

Rejected --> [*]
Final --> [*]
```

### SIP Statuses
- **Draft**: Initial version under development. The proposer is still working on the proposal and nobody else is expected to contribute. The proposer will change the status to Review when ready.
- **Review**: Open for review by maintainers and the community. Anybody can contribute. A maintainer will change the status to Accepted or Rejected when a decision is made. The proposer can also set the status to Withdrawn at any point.
- **Accepted**: Approved by the maintainers and planned for future implementation.
- **Rejected**: Declined by maintainers or community consensus. The proposal will not be pursued further.
- **Withdrawn**: The proposer has withdrawn the proposal. It's no longer under consideration.
- **Implemented**: The proposal has been fully implemented in code and is ready for deployment in testnet environment. The maintainer will update the status to Implemented.
- **Staging**: The proposal has been deployed to testnet for live testing. The maintainer will update the status to Staging.
- **Final**: The proposal has been successfully deployed to mainnet. The maintainer will update the status to Final.

> ## Citations

Reviewer 2: Better to use "References" instead of "Citations", because you are not actually "citing" these sources anywhere.
This section is just a list of places with related information.
Same comment for the template.

---
sip: 1
title: SIP Process and Guidelines
author: Team TSS
discussions-to: N/A
status: Draft
category: Informational

> created: 2018-Jun-4

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be the current date?

Author: Good catch, I forgot to change that year 👍🏼

maintainer: Team TSS
---

> # SIP-1: SIP Process and Guidelines

Reviewer: Should we create a "Template" section that explains the metadata fields in the header: what fields are required, which are optional, and which values are expected? For example, whether "Author" should include just a name or name and email, and how to list multiple authors. Maybe we could also include a link to the actual template for reference (symbol/SIPs/template.md).

Author: Yes, I have included a link for the `Template` file in the readme.md

Reviewer: > Should we create a "Template" section that explains the metadata fields in the header: what fields are required, which are optional, and which values are expected?

Can we add the template explanatory section to SIP-1, similar to how it is done in BIP-1 and EIP-1: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0001.mediawiki#bip-header-preamble

Author: > Can we add the template explanatory section to SIP-1, similar to how it is done in BIP-1 and EIP-1: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0001.mediawiki#bip-header-preamble

I added an explanation on `Authors` and `Maintainer`.
let me know anything else in your mind 🙏🏼

## Abstract

This document establishes the Symbol Improvement Proposal (SIP) process. It defines how proposals are created, reviewed, and accepted, and includes roles, categories, status flows, and templates to guide authors, maintainers, and the broader community.

> ## Current

Reviewer 2: See my comments to the template.

Currently, there is no standardized process for proposing changes to Symbol. As a result, community members often find it difficult to contribute ideas or understand how proposals are reviewed and adopted.

## Suggested

- Establish a standardized SIP process and markdown template.
- Define clear roles and responsibilities for authors and maintainers.
- Use GitHub as the central hub for SIP tracking and discussions.

## Rationale

The Symbol community regularly generates valuable ideas, but many contributors are unsure how to formally submit or advocate for changes. Discussions often happen in informal channels like Discord or Twitter and are quickly lost. This proposal provides a clear, transparent, and collaborative pathway for meaningful contributions to Symbol's evolution.

## Implementation

### SIP Workflow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Proposer
participant Discord/Twitter
participant Maintainer
participant GitHub

> Proposer->>Discord/Twitter: Discuss idea with the community

Reviewer 2: Why don't you add the numbers below to the arrows, so it's even easier to follow the process?

Author: agree, it sound good to me 👍🏼

Proposer->>Maintainer: Request SIP number
Maintainer->>GitHub: Create SIP issue
Proposer->>GitHub: Submit SIP PR
Maintainer->>GitHub: Review PR and provide feedback
Maintainer->>GitHub: Update SIP status
```

> 1. Proposer come with idea discuss the idea in discord / twitter.The proposer discusses their idea in public channels (Discord, Twitter, etc).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Proposer comes up with an idea and discusses it in a public channel (Discord, Twitter, etc).
```

> 2. When the idea is mature, the proposer requests a SIP number from a relevant maintainer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. When the proposer considers the idea to be mature enough, they requests a SIP number from a relevant maintainer.
```

Who are these maintainers? How will the proposers know who to ask for a SIP number?

Author: IMO, maintainers should be people who are directly involved with the project.
For example, Explorer, Oleh or I could be maintainers.

Reviewer: It might be better to include a clear process for how the author should find a relevant maintainer or how a maintainer is assigned. Alternatively, we could remove that part and allow the author to submit the SIP PR as-is. Then, once the SIP PR is opened, a maintainer can add the SIP number to it. What do you think?

Author: > It might be better to include a clear process for how the author should find a relevant maintainer or how a maintainer is assigned. 

I can add more detail. The community member can tag anyone from TSS and review the idea in the discussion.

> Alternatively, we could remove that part and allow the author to submit the SIP PR as-is. Then, once the SIP PR is opened, a maintainer can add the SIP number to it. What do you think?

The reason I let the maintainer assign the SIP number and only create a PR is to filter out those unqualified ideas. It would be too time-consuming for us to review every PR otherwise.

> 2. When the idea is mature, the proposer requests a SIP number from a relevant maintainer.

Reviewer 3: Is it okay for the applicant to judge whether the idea is mature enough on their own? Do they need to show any evidence to the maintenance personnel?

Reviewer 2: I think so, yes, because this is just the initial proposal. The discussion begins after this step.

Reviewer 3: Thank you. I understand it.

> 3. The maintainer assigns a SIP number and creates a corresponding GitHub issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The maintainer assigns a SIP number and creates the corresponding GitHub issue.
```

4. The proposer writes the SIP and submits a pull request.

> 5. The maintainer reviews the submission, provides feedback, and updates the SIP status as needed.

Reviewer 2: Maybe split this step in two, so it matches the diagram.
Or merge the two arrows in the diagram.

### SIP Categories
- **Core**: Protocol-level changes requiring forks.
- **Networking**: Node configuration or networking behavior.
- **Interface**: API (e.g., REST) or SDK-level changes.
- **Library**: Updates to client libraries (npm, Python, etc.).

> - **Application**: Application behavior or integration patterns.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I know what "integration patterns" are.

- **Informational**: Non-binding proposals or documentation guidelines.

> ### SIP Statuses

Reviewer 2: It would be good to explain, for each status:
* Who is expected to act in that phase
* What phases come next, who decides when to move, and when.

For example:
```
**Draft**: Initial version under development. The proposer is still working on the proposal and nobody else is expected to contribute. The proposer will change the status to Review when ready.
**Review**: Open for review by maintainers and the community. Anybody can contribute. A maintainer will change the status to Accepted or Rejected when a decision is made. The proposer can also set the status to Withdrawn at any point.
```

Also, it would be cool to add a diagram with all the statuses and arrows between them, and the name of the responsible on the arrows.

- **Draft**: Initial version under development.
- **Review**: Open for review by maintainers and the community.
- **Accepted**: Approved and planned for implementation.
- **Rejected**: Declined by maintainers or community consensus.
- **Withdrawn**: The author has withdrawn the proposal.
- **Implemented**: Implemented in code.
- **Staging**: Deployed to testnet.
- **Final**: Deployed to mainnet.

> ## Citation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Citations
```
